Rocky is an Eridian engineer from the planet Erid, sent into space with twenty-three others to save the star systems and his planet from Astrophage. He communicates using musical tones and chords, though Grace designs a program that translates his language into English and grants him a human voice
Project Hail Mary
In the Tau Ceti system, Ryland Grace finds Rocky soon after activating the petrovascope. He sees the outline of the ship interrupting the Petrova line. He attempts to avoid the ship and flee, but it continues to catch up to him. Grace's AI system in the ship calls the strange occurrence "Blip-A". Rocky launches a capsule Mary calls "Blip-B" at the Hail Mary that Grace mistakes for a bomb, bracing for impact - only for it to bounce off. Rocky tries again, sending "Blip-C" at a much slower rate. Grace steadies himself and retrieves the blip, bringing it inside where he opens it using the opposite of human technology - "righty loosy, lefty tighty." Inside the capsule is three-dimensional representation of the planets - with Erid highlighted as the creatures home planet. Grace adds Earth to the diagram and returns it.

Rocky uses a robot attached to Blip-A to build a tunnel made of xenonite, connecting the two ships. Within the tunnel, Rocky and Grace interact for the first time and realize that neither one is harmful. They are fascinated with each other but have a clear language barrier. The two slowly build their vocabulary until they can speak to each other. They are both the only survivors of their team and have the same mission - stopping the sun eating Astrophage. Grace inputs Rocky's responses to his questions into a computer that automatically translates his speech into English. The pair then chooses a "human voice" for Rocky. Fascinated by Grace's technology, Rocky builds a hexagonal ball so that he could enter the Hail Mary. Once he enters, they work on finding the reason behind Tau Ceti's uniqueness.
Roughly the size of a Labrador, Rocky's exterior possesses a smooth, rock-like texture. His skin color varies from blackish-brown to brown. He has five limb like appendages, and is described as "similar in appearance to a spider." On each limb, Rocky has three triangular shaped fingers, none appearing to function as a thumb. The top of his carapace has a pentagonal outcropping of the same rock-like material as the rest of his body. Carvings cover most of his appendages, as do spots of a green gel or stone-like substance. He lacks a a face and uses sonar or echolocation to "see". A hole in the bottom of his body is where he shoves the food he consumes.

After risking his life to save Grace and exposing himself to Earth's elements, Rocky's crevices leak a silver substance. His body is scarred and heals improperly.

Personality
Rocky is an experienced engineer and loyal friend. He survived by himself on Blip-A, but was left with residual post traumatic stress, anxiety, and survivor's guilt. He wanted to observe Grace sleep so that no harm would come to him, as the rest of his team died in their sleep. He is incredibly smart, able to understand and nearly master the English language in a short amount of time without any technological help.

Trivia
Rocky was created using a puppet and not CGI. His actor, James Ortiz, served as both the voice of Rocky and his puppeteer.